+++
title = "Why fly?"
[taxonomies]
tags = [ "fly.io", "anycast", "internet" ]
+++

In my [previous blog post](@/blog/2021-06-27-hello-world.md) I gave an overview of this blog, project, etc. One of the first points of excitement that I mentioned is [fly](https://fly.io). More likely than not, you haven't heard of fly (yet), and wondered what that's about, and why it would be worth caring about.

At the risk of duplicating a bunch of fly's marketing material, this blog post will go a bit into the topic of why fly is cool, and why I chose to use it.

## What is fly?

So let's get into it. What the hell is fly? They call themselves a CDN for apps. Great, more jargon. The whole point of a Content Delivery Network (CDN) is to get the data you want to deliver as close to the end users as you can, physically. That way, the data has a small physical distance to travel, so it's served faster. By the logic of faster experience == better experience == happier customers, this is good. This data is usually in the form of static files, and the CDN is basically "someone else's web server" serving these files.

Fly takes this to the next extreme, and basically says "why data, when you have apps?". Valid point. Many of the services that people interact with are interactive web apps. While a CDN is great for delivering the static files which make up the initial loading phase of the application, they don't help much for API calls. Wouldn't it be nice to just deploy your app into an "app CDN", and know that it's within 20ms of the end user?

## Real web apps have real data

If you're a web app developer then around about now your skepticism is kicking in. There's something that I ignored completely. A web application is only useful with data. And data has to live _somewhere_. Then you have latency between the web app and wherever the _data_ is, and now the great "app CDN" idea is dead.

In principle yes, but no. This is an area where there is a lot of active development on the fly platform, and honestly also not one which I'm well-versed in, so I'm going to basically hand wave here, point to some resources from fly and move on to what _I_ find exciting.

For those who are using a relational database, fly provides postgres instances out of the box, as well as infrastructure tooling to automatically ship mutating HTTP requests to a write-capable server. There are a lot more details available [here](https://fly.io/blog/globally-distributed-postgres/). Either way, this certainly is an interesting approach for a read-heavy application.

There are also other database options which are _designed_ to be distributed, which could be helpful. Again, I'm no expert on this, so I'm going to move on.

## What makes fly superfly?

If you're not convinced by the use-case, you might be excited by the technical challenges of running a CDN. I am excited by the internet, networking, cloud computing, etc. so from my point of view, that's cool stuff. If you don't like those things, you might not think that this is cool.

Okay, let's take it back a few steps and look at the big picture. What does a CDN _do_? It gets the same _data_ physically close to _many_ of its users. Ok, but what does that even _mean_? It means that if `example.com` is served from a CDN, and I (sitting in Switzerland) load up `example.com`, it should serve it from the nearest datacenter to me (maybe Frankfurt). If you, sitting on the other side of the world, load up `example.com`, it should serve it from the nearest datacenter to _you_ (maybe that's Tokyo, maybe it's Maine).

Effectively, we're both talking to `example.com`, but talking to different servers, in different parts of the world.

How does _that_ even work?

## Anytime, anywhere, anycast?

So you're probably familiar with the fact that you can use DNS to resolve a domain name (like `example.com`) to an IP address (like `93.184.216.34`) which is the identifier (for lack of a better word) of a server. You may now wonder: "Is this magic driven by DNS?"

No. Well, it could be, but for Fly it isn't. There is (the not very reliable) GeoDNS (which I will unhelpfully not elaborate on) and it would probably be possible to build a mechanism which gets the same result _using_ DNS (and some client-side magic). We want to make all of this work "out of the box" without having to build additional layers of logic.

The answer is both weirder, and simpler than one might think: there is only one IP address, but there are multiple servers spread all around the world, which answer requests for that IP address.

The _network_ automatically forwards the network packets to the correct server. This "forwarding" is also called routing, and is an important aspect of the internet.

The setup of having multiple computers in different places which respond to the same IP address is called anycast networking.

## Route me where?

Before we get to the most interesting part, it might be worthwhile to make a quick detour and look at how traffic is moved around through the internet. If you know what BGP and ASs are, you can probably safely skip this section.

The internet is made up of a bunch of machines which are all connected to one another. Simply put, the mechanism by which they communicate is by sending data to another machine addressed to the recipient machine's IP address. But not every machine is directly connected to all others, it's a network of connections (the inter-net). To get data from your computer to one of google's servers, you need to pass through a number of network devices which each have their own IP address. They sit in the network and pass traffic from place to place.

Each one of these machines makes routing decisions with each packet of data which it receives, deciding to which other machine it should forward the packet so that it will get to the right place.

In order to make a routing decision, the machines must first know something about the structure of the network so that they know how to get a packet closer to its destination. The internet uses the Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) to exchange this information, and to control how routing decisions are made. BGP is a complicated topic which I am hopelessly underqualified to explain, so I will refrain from trying.

Participation in BGP requires that one register an Autonomous System (AS). An AS is essentially a collection of IP address blocks and associated routing policies. Registering an AS requires that one own at least a /24 block of IP addresses, something which is becoming harder and harder to come by these days. BGP nodes exchange routes with BGP nodes from other, neighbouring ASs.

## A Caveat

There is an issue with anycast which can be problematic for connection-oriented protocols (like TCP): the network can spontaneously decide to "reconfigure itself", and start routing your packets to a different destination host. In principle this is a good thing, the network is designed to work around connectivity issues and self-heal. For connection-oriented protocols, this could mean that suddenly your network packets are arriving at a server that you've never "spoken to" before, and which doesn't know how to respond to your request.

There are mechanisms to avoid this from happening by crafting routing policies in such a way as to avoid dynamic reconfiguration, etc. [TODO].

## Pulling it all together

Okay, so we've seen how traffic is routed in the internet. We've seen that it involves BGP and ASs. We also know that for a CDN we would like to have machines distributed physically throughout the world, in multiple Points of Presence (or PoPs).

All in all, if we wanted our own an anycast CDN, we would need at least a /24 of public IPs. We would need our own AS. We would need to physically put our servers (or rent virtual servers) in datacenters all around the world. We would need to set up "peering" with neighbouring ASs. We would need to manage our own BGP servers and configure them to avoid pitfalls of anycast routing. 

And all of this is what fly does for you out of the box. Additionally, they provide a pretty nifty platform to run your app on, using fancy technology like AWS's [Firecracker VM](https://firecracker-microvm.github.io/), [Wireguard](https://www.wireguard.com/) for secure private networking, and [Let's Encrypt](https://letsencrypt.org/) for TLS termination.

## References

I could not have written this blog post without some amazing content which I came across on the Web.

As usual, Cloudflare has some pretty great content on [anycast networking](https://www.cloudflare.com/learning/cdn/glossary/anycast-network/), [what is a CDN](https://www.cloudflare.com/learning/cdn/what-is-a-cdn/), and a good in-depth blog post on their [anycast architecture](https://blog.cloudflare.com/cloudflares-architecture-eliminating-single-p/).

For a more in-depth overview of how to actually operate an anycast network, this presentation [Best Practices in IPv4 Anycast Routing](https://www.menog.org/presentations/menog-3/upadhaya-Anycast-v09.pdf) provides a lot of useful information.

If you would be interested in running your own anycast network, Samir Jafferali's [Build your own Anycast Network in 9 steps](http://www.samir.ca/2016/12/11/build-your-own-anycast-network-in-9-steps.html) guide gives a lot of pointers on how to actually make this happen in practice. In his guide he references Nat Morris' [Anycast on a shoestring](https://ripe69.ripe.net/presentations/36-Anycast-on-a-shoe-string-RIPE69.pdf). There is also a [recording](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=itEtjsauwFQ) of this presentation.

















