+++
title = "OBJC_DEBUG_MISSING_POOLS"
[taxonomies]
tags = ["TIL", "Objective C", "Rust", "AppKit"]
+++

TIL about OBJC_DEBUG_MISSING_POOLS=Yes.

I was on a small side mission to build a macOS taskbar widget to visualize
when my external display and Mac don't correctly negotiate to use USB3.1
(renege)[1]. This manifests itself as my CamLink 4k not being connected with
USB3.1, which is the signal that I'm currently looking for.

My goal, as with all side projects, was to implement it in Rust. I did some
Objective C back at university, but it's been a long time. I used Claude to
guide me through what I needed to do and implement. Once again it's amazing how
far using AI tooling can get you without much domain-specific knowledge, and
as we shall see, how easy you can shoot yourself in the foot because of a lack
of proper understanding.

I ended up using the Rust bindings to AppKit, IOKit, CoreFoundation, et. al.,
which are very unsafe, and require a very different mental model of memory and
ownership than Rust (obviously).

I was trying to understand the myriad of unsafe required to interface with
AppKit, IOKit, etc. I got some review feedback from Claude that the icon that
I was displaying in the status bar would not be rendered because its container
would be dropped (because it had no remaining references).

But it _was_ rendering properly. Claude suggested to run the application with
OBJC_DEBUG_MISSING_POOLS=Yes on, which spewed out a ton of logs, mostly
complaining about things leaking.

It turned out that the reason the icon was still rendering was because the
runtime was leaking the item, because I didn't correctly configure the
application (Cocoa expects an NSAutoReleasePool [2] to be available to it, if
there is none, it leaks everything that should have been autoreleased).

Running all of the application initialization in an autoreleasepool reliably
caused the icon to disappear. Hurrah! I guess...

So why was the icon's container being released? Basically because I hadn't
grokked the AppKit APIs, so my implementation was holding on to the wrong
reference. To show something in the status bar, one must get the global
NSStatusBar instance, and then add an NSStatusItem to the status bar, and
hold onto it.

Coming back to OBJC_DEBUG_MISSING_POOLS=Yes; there is a huge amount of runtime
information that one can expose for Objective-C programs. To get an overview,
run an AppKit binary with the OBJC_HELP=1 env var set. The rest is an exercise
for the reader.

Note: This post was written solely by a human (me).

[1]: https://www.github.com/JamesGuthrie/renege
[2]: https://developer.apple.com/documentation/foundation/nsautoreleasepool
